DIURING the past several decades there has been a growing interest in location theory in America. Building on the pioneering works of Thtinen, Weber, Lbsch, Palander, and others,2 a number of economists and ge-ographers have extended the analysis to apply to a wide range of problems and have attempted to synthesize location theory with other fields of economics.3 However, very little work has been done in using the principles of location to ana-lyze the historical growth of regions in America.4 While economists concerned with location theory sometimes point out the implications of their analysis for the growth of regions, they have not followed up these discrete observations with any systematic analysis. A fundamental dif-ficulty has been that the theory of re-gional economic growth' has little rele-vance for the development of regions in America. Not only does the sequence of stages outlined by the theory bear little resemblance to American development but its policy implications are also funda-mentally misleading. This paper will attempt to demon-strate the inadequacies of the existing theory of regional economic growth and will advance a number of propositions that may lead to a more useful theory, both for analyzing the historical develop-ment of the American economy and for understanding the contemporary prob-lems associated with regional economic growth.
The analytical propositions advanced in this paper, though explicitly oriented to America's development, would apply equally well to other areas that meet the following conditions: (1) regions that have grown up within a framework of capitalist institutions and have therefore responded to profit maximizing oppor-tunities, in which factors of production have been relatively mobile,6 and (2) regions that have grown up without the strictures imposed by population pres-sure. II Both location theory and the theory of regional economic growth have described a typical sequence of stages through which regions move in the course of their development. E. M. Hoover and Joseph Fisher, in a recent essay entitled "Re-search in Regional Economic Growth,"8 point out that "there is now a fairly well accepted body of theory regarding the normal sequence of development stages in a region."' This sequence may be out-lined as follows: 1. The first stage in the economic his-tory of most regions is one of a self-suf-ficient subsistence economy in which there is little investment or trade. The basic agricultural stratum of population is simply located according to the dis-tribution of natural resources. 2. With improvements in transport, the region develops some trade and local specialization. "A second stratum of pop-ulation comes into being, carrying on simple village industries for the farmers. Since the materials, the market, and the labor are all furnished originally by the agricultural populations, the new 'indus-trial superstructure' is located with ref er-ence to that 'basic stratum.' "10 3. With the increase of interregional trade, a region tends to move through a succession of agricultural crops from ex-tensive grazing to cereal production to fruit-growing, dairy farming, and truck gardening."' 4. With increased population and di-minishing returns in agriculture and other extractive industries, a region is forced to industrialize. "Industrialization means the introduction of so-called sec-ondary industries (mining and manufac-turing) on a considerable scale."12 Typi-cally the early stages of industrialization are based on the products of agriculture and forestry and include such activities as the processing of food, the manufac-ture of wood products, and the prepara-tion of textile fibers. If industrialization is to continue, mineral and energy re-sources become critical.
As a second stage of industrialization, then, we see [in the regions possessing economically usable mineral resources] such industries as the smelting, refining, and processing of metals; oil refining; chemical industries based mainly on coal, petroleum, potash, salt, and other minerals; and glass and ceramics industries. Where cheap hydroelectric power is available, industries requiring large amounts of cheap power (nonferrous metals refining, ferroalloys, and special steels, artificial abrasives, etc.) are possible, as in Norway, Switzerland, the Ten-nessee Valley, and the Columbia River Valley.'3 5. A final stage of regional growth is reached when a region specializes in ter-tiary industries producing for export. Such a region exports to less advanced regions capital, skilled personnel, and special services. The role of transport costs has been critical in the advancement through these successive stages of growth. Isard summarizes this effect as follows: "His-torically we find that reduced transport rates have tended (1) to transform a scat-tered, ubiquitous pattern of production into an increasingly concentrated one, and (2) to effect progressive differentia-tion and selection between sites with su-perior and inferior resources and trade routes.""4 III When this sequence of stages is placed against the economic history of regions in America, two basic objections arise. (1) These stages bear little resemblance to the actual development of regions. Moreover, they fail to provide any in-sights into the causes of growth and change. A theory of regional economic growth should clearly focus on the criti-cal factors that implement or impede de-velopment. (2) Furthermore, if we want a normative model of how regions' should grow, in order to analyze the causes of arrested development or relative decay, then this sequence of stages is of little use and is actually misleading in the empha-sis it places on the need for (and difficul-ties of) industrialization."5 The problems of industrialization will be explored later in this paper when the causes of regional growth are examined. Here we are concerned with the first ob-jection: the lack of correspondence be-tween the stages of the theory of regional economic growth and the economic his-tory of regions in America. A major dis-crepancy is immediately evident; name-ly, that America was exploited in large part as a capitalist venture. Settlement in new regions and their subsequent growth were shaped by the search for and exploitation of goods in demand on world markets. The result was a kind of development very different from that implied by the theory of regional devel-opment in which regions gradually ex-tended the market from a subsistence economy. From the early joint-stock companies on through the whole west-ward expansion, a basic objective was to exploit the land and its resources in order to produce goods that could be marketed "abroad" and would bring in a money income. This is in marked contrast to the experience of Europe (which appears to be the model for the early stages of the theo-ry of regional economic growth), where a market-oriented economy emerged only gradually from the predominantly local economies of the manorial system. If a subsistence economy existed in a new region in America, it was solely because of a lack of means of transport, a condi-tion that was swiftly remedied by the concerted efforts of the settlers.'6 This is not to deny that many homesteaders maintained a subsistence existence but only to affirm that such settlement was not significant in shaping the economic development of the region, any more than the modern subsistence farmer of the backcountry is shaping the develop-ment of contemporary agriculture. This point may be illustrated briefly from the economic history of the Pacific Northwest.'7 Not only has this region never experienced a subsistence econ-omy, but its markets from the very be-ginning have often been thousands of miles distant. Even before general settle-ment, the region was exploited for its furs by the Hudson Bay Company. With the decline of the fur trade and the coming of settlers, wheat, flour, and lumber were quickly developed as exportable com-modities. They first found markets in California in the 1840's. With the gold rush the demand for both wheat and lumber expanded tremendously, and the region experienced rapid growth based on these two commodities. In 1868 the first wheat shipment went from Portland to Liverpool, and by the late 1870's Pa-cific Northwest soft wheat had become an important part of the world wheat trade; a fleet of ships sailed from the re-gion around Cape Horn every year. In 1857 the first shipment of flour was made to Japan, and thereafter Pacific North-west flour found markets in Australia, Hawaii, the Orient, Europe, British Co-lumbia, and California."8 In each decade after 1850 an increasing percentage of the crop was exported either as wheat or in the form of flour. Before the end of the nineteenth century over half the crop was being exported from the region. The history of the lumber industry re-flects a similar preoccupation with mar-kets foreign to the region. The first lum-ber shipment went to California in 1847, and during the gold rush lumber exports from the Pacific Northwest expanded rapidly. The rate of growth of the lumber industry was directly related to the growth of the markets reached by water (primarily California, British Columbia, and some foreign markets). In 1894 James J. Hill established a 40 cent per hundredweight freight rate on lumber to Minneapolis on his railroads, and the in-dustry began to compete with the south-ern pine region for markets in the Middle West. With this rapid growth of markets the industry expanded many fold. In the first five years of the twentieth century output more than doubled, and there-after in each successive decade Pacific Northwest fir increased its share of the national market at the expense of south-ern pine. The rate of growth of the region has been directly related to these basic exports. Between 1860 and 1920 lumber and flour-milling accounted for between 40 and 60 per cent of the value of the region's manufacturing output. Almost all the rest of secondary industry (as well as tertiary industry) was passive in the sense that it served local consumer needs. its growth therefore reflected the chang-ing fortunes of the region's exportable commodities."9 Wheat played a similarly critical role in the development of the region, although by the end of the nine-teenth century the agricultural export base had broadened to include a number of other commodities. This brief account of the development of the Pacific Northwest bears no re-semblance to the theory of regional eco-nomic growth. There was no gradual evolution out of a subsistence economy. Instead the whole development of the re-gion from the beginning was dependent on its success in producing exportable commodities. Nor was the Pacific North-west's history exceptional. Furs and the products of mining were typically the early exportable commodities of western America. Colonial America exported such products as tobacco, rice, indigo, naval stores, ships, and fish. Even the well-worn historical generalization of lo-cation theorists that reduced transport rates will transform a scattered, ubiqui-tous pattern of production into an in-creasingly concentrated one is not true of America. Many new regions in America developed from the beginning around one or two exportable commodities and only widened their export base after transport costs had been reduced.20In short, both this generalization of location theorists and the early stages in the theory of re-gional economic growth appear to be taken uncritically from European experi-ence rather than derived from the eco-nomic history of this country. A basic starting point for reshaping our views on regional economic growth might well be the insights of the late Harold Innis in his studies of the growth of the Canadian economy.2' Innis' early research had convinced him of the cru-cial importance of the export staple in shaping new economies. His subsequent studies of the growth of these staple ex-ports were always directed toward at-tempting to understand "how the Cana-dian economy had been generated and how it had been shaped as a working economy."2 2 An analysis of the export staples of the Canadian economy became the basis for understanding the character of that country's economic development. Moreover, it provided real insights into the political and social institutions of the country. The term "staple" refers to the chief commodity produced by a region. It is customarily thought of as describing products of extractive industry. Since my concept of the export commodities of a region may include products of second-ary or tertiary industry as well, I shall use the term "exportable commodities" (or services) to denote the individual items and the export base23t o denote collectively the exportable commodities (or services) of a region. In young regions, typically dependent on extractive indus-try, my exportable commodities and In-nis' export staples are synonymous. Settlers in new regions typically ex-perimented with a number of different crops before discovering one that was economicallyf easible.24T he success of an industry in producing an exportable commodity can be understood in terms of the principles of location theory.25 The development of an exportable commod-ity reflected a comparative advantage in relative costs of production, including transfer costs. Distributive transfer costs have served to limit the extent of the export market. From the viewpoint of the region, the demand for the exportable commodity was an exogenous factor, but both proc-essing and transfer costs were not. His-torically new regions bent every effort to reduce these costs in their concerted drive to promote their economic well-being. The ceaseless efforts of new regions to get federally subsidized internal im-provements, state aid for canal construc-tion, federal and state aid for railroads, and river and harbor improvements were a part of the continuous effort of each region to reduce transfer costs to better the competitive position of its exports.26 As regions grew up around the export base, external economies developed which improved the competitive cost position of the exportable commodities. The de-velopment of specialized marketing or-ganization, improved credit and trans-port facilities, a trained labor force, and complementary industries was oriented to the export base. The concerted effort to improve the technology of production has been equally important. Agricultural experi-ment stations, state universities, and other local research groups become serv-ice adjuncts to export industries and con-duct research in technological improve-ments in agriculture, mining, or what-ever manufacturing comprises the re-gion's export base. The purpose of this concerted effort is better to enable the region to compete with other regions or foreign countries for markets. In new regions highly de-pendent on extractive industry, these ex-ternal economies and technological de-velopments tend to more than counter-act diminishing returns in the staple product.27A s a result, these efforts tend to reinforce a region's dependence on its existing staples rather than promote changes in the export base. This con-servative bias is further reinforced by the role of capital. Capital is typically im-ported into new regions in the develop-, ment of the export staple industries. In-deed, until a region develops sufficient income to provide a substantial share of its own investment capital, it must rely upon outside sources. External suppliers of capital tend to invest primarily in ex-isting export industry rather than in new, untried enterprises.28 IV The following section will deal with the way in which regions grow; first, however, we must explore the signifi-cance of the export base in shaping the whole character of a region's economy. At the outset, export industries must l)e clearly distinguished from "residen-tiary industries."29T he term "residen-tiary" is used to designate industry for the local market which develops where the consuming population resides. In or-der to determine the market area of each industry more precisely than can be done by a priori classification, the "location quotient" developed by Hildebrand and Mace30 is employed. The location quo-tient measures the concentration of em-ployment in a given industry in one area (the "subject economy," which for our purposes is the region) with another area (the "benchmark economy," which for our purposes is the nation). Formally the location quotient is the numeri-cal equivalent of a fraction whose numerator is employment in a given industry in the subject economy relative to total employment in the subject economy and whose denominator is employment in the given industry in the bench-mark economy relative to total employment in the benchmark economy. A priori a location of 1.00 means no greater relative specialization in the subject economy than in the benchmark economy, for the particular industry. In each industry values significantly below 1.00 indicate much greater relative specialization in the benchmark economy; or if well over 1.00 much greater relative specialization in the subject economy.
Thus industries producing for export will show values significantly above 1.00.32 Wre are now in a better position to ex-amine the role of the export base in shap-ing the economy of the region. Clearly the export base plays a vital role in determining the level of absolute and per capita income of a region. While the return to factors of production33 in the export industries indicates the direct importance of these industries for the well-being of the region, it is the indirect effect that is most important. Since resi-dentiary industry depends entirely on demand within the region, it has histori-cally been dependent on the fate of the export base.3' Vining's analysis indicates that employment in residentiary indus-try tends to bear a direct relationship to employment in export industries. The median figure for employment in residen-tiary industry in individual states was approximately 55 per cent of the total employment.35 The export staple plays an equally vital role in the cyclical sensitivity of the region; it acts as the "carrier" in diffus-ing changes in the level of income from other regions to the subject region. Fur-thermore, the sensitivity of the region to fluctuations depends on the income elas-ticities of the export staples. Clearly re-gions that specialize in a few products with high income elasticities will have more violent fluctuations in income than more diversified regions.36 When we turn to the role of exports in shaping the pattern of urbanization and nodal centers,37 we are on ground that has been more thoroughly explored by location theorists and geographers.38 Again, however, the pioneering work has been done by German location theorists who have extended the implications of each stage of economic growth to em-brace the logical pattern of urbaniza-tion that would ensue.39 Since these stages do not fit the American develop-ment, the pattern of American urbaniza-tion likewise differs in many respects from the German models. However, it is beyond the scope of this article to ex-plore the whole question of urbanization and the export base. We may note in passing the observations of August L6sch that in such areas as Iowa, with a rather even distribution of production of agri-cultural staples, the distances between towns increase with their size.40 In con-trast, cities in the English coal districts are the same distance from each other irrespective of size.4' While discussion of the spatial distri-bution of urban areas would take us too far afield, the role of the export base in shaping the growth of nodal centers de-serves some attention. Nodes grow up because of special locational advantages that lower the transfer and processing costs of exportable commodities. Nodal centers become trading centers through which exports leave the region and im-ports enter for distribution throughout the area. Here special facilities develop to implement the production and distri-bution of the staples. Subsidiary indus-tries to service the export industry, as well as specialized banking, brokerage, wholesaling, and other business services, concentrate in these centers and act to improve the cost position of the export. 42 The character of the labor force will be fundamentally influenced by the export industries. The types of skills required, the seasonality and stability of employ-ment, and the conditions of work will shape the social attitudes of the working force. As already noted, the political atti-tudes of the region will be largely di-rected toward improving the position of its export base. The extent of such activ-ity is too well known historically and too obvious in the contemporary American political scene to require extended discus-sion. V Previous sections of this paper have examined the significance of the export base for a region's economy. I have tried to indicate the primary role that such ex-ports have played historically, but I have not yet touched on the critical question of the causes of the growth of a region. It is evident that this growth is closely tied to the success of its exports and may take place either as a result of the im-proved position of existing exports rela-tive to competing areas or as a result of the development of new exports. How-ever, a major question that must first be examined is whether a region must indus-trialize if it is to continue to grow. Such a necessity has been a major tenet of the theory of regional economic growth. Moreover, industrialization has been re-garded as a difficult stage to achieve, so that it is the source of problems of ar-rested regional development. Hoover and Fisher stress three factors that make this transition difficult: (1) the need for greatly improved transportation facili-ties, which call for large-scale capital investments; (2) the need for intensifica-tion of the geographic division of labor; and (3) the fact that industrial technol-ogy is novel to an agriculturalr egion.43If these statements are correct, then the im-plications for our analysis are clear. At some point regions must shift from an extractive to an industrial export base, and this shift will be fraught with diffi-culties. However, the contention that re-gions must industrialize in order to con-tinue to grow, as well as the contention that the development of secondary and tertiary industry is somehow difficult to achieve, are both based on some funda-mental misconceptions. The importance of industrializing is based upon the notion that, with in-creased population and diminishing re-turns in extractive industry, the shift to manufacturing is the only way to main-tain sustained growth (measured in terms of increasing per capita income). This argument has been buttressed by evidence such as that gathered by Dr. Louis Bean correlating per capita income with percentage of the labor force en-gaged in primary, secondary, and ter-tiary occupations by states for 1939.44 Bean's figures purport to demonstrate that increased industrialization leads to higher per capita income, and he goes so far as to say that "a 10-point [per cent] increase in industrial progress in the east and south ... apparently tends to add $100 to $150 (1939 prices) per capita and in the western states substantially more."45I n fact, Bean's statistics do not prove this, and the policy implications of such generalizations may be misleading and dangerous. We may note first of 'all that his cor-relation is not very impressive. There were eleven states in which the percent-age of the labor force in primary occupa-tions was above the national average whose per capita income either exceeded the national average or was close enough to the average so that annual variations could well place it on one side or the other. Indeed, had the correlation been made for postwar years, it would have been substantially different.46 Furthermore, money-income data sig-nificantly understate the real income of the farmer,47b ecause of the great variety of goods and services produced on the farm that require cash payment in the city.48 However, the real source of error has resulted from a basic misunderstanding of the nature of the economy. A state whose export base consists mostly of agricultural products may have a low percentage of its labor force in primary activity and a high percentage in tertiary occupations and yet be basically depend-ent upon agriculture for the high per capita income it enjoys. It is the agricul-tural export staples that provide the high income that enables the state to support a substantial level of services. In such a case both the secondary and the tertiary activities are "residentiary" and can survive only because of the success of the basic agricultural export staples. In short, a percentage shift in such a state from primary to secondary and tertiary employment does not necessarily reflect a shift away from dependence on agricul-ture to dependence on manufacturing and services. Instead, it may reflect the simple fact that -farmers are receiving high incomes for their staple crops and, therefore buy more goods and services from residentiary industry. This brings us to the related question of the difficulty of industrialization. The implication of the preceding paragraph is that a substantial amount of secondary industry of the residentiary variety wills develop automatically as a result of high incomes received from the exportable commodities. Nor is this the only kind of manufacturing that can be expected to develop. We may distinguish four differ-ent kinds of manufacturing that will de-velop 49 1. Materials-orientedin dustriesw hich, because of marked transfer advantages of the manufactured product over the raw material, locate at the source of the latter. Among the industries in this cate-gory are sugar-beet refining, flour-mill-ing,50 and lumbering.5' Such industries may develop further stages of vertical integration until transfer cost advan-tages become equalized. Such industry is typically part of the export base. 2. Service industries to the export in-dustry. Foundries and establishments that make machine tools, specialized agricultural implements, and logging and lumbering equipment are illustrations. 3. Residentiary industry producing for local consumption. 4. Footloose industries, where trans-fer costs are not of significant importance in location. A great many such industries develop purely by chance in some loca-tion.52 While footloose industries have typi-cally developed by chance, the other three types of secondary activity develop naturally because of locational advan-tages in a society responsive to profit-maximizing stimuli. There is nothing dif-ficult about the development of such in-dustries. The difficulties arise when pro-moters seek to develop in a region indus-tries which simply are unsuited for the area and which can therefore only be maintained under hothouse conditions.53 The argument may be advanced that the kinds of industry described above do not constitute industrialization. How much and what kind of secondary indus-try must a region possess to be termed "industrialized"? By 1950 census clas-sification, the state of Oregon had almost 24 per cent of its labor force in manufac-turing, which was only slightly under the United States average (25.9 per cent) and exceeded the United States average in durable goods (16.7 per cent as compared with the national average of 13.8 per cent). It was well ahead of the neighbor-ing states of Washington and California, despite the fact that these two states had a variety of manufacturing industries, in contrast to Oregon's specialized depend-ence on the Douglas fir lumber industry. Is such a state industrialized?I mplicit in the concept appears to be the notion that industrialization is somehow tied up with steel and the capital goods indus-tries. However, historically, the location-al pull of coal and iron ore has shaped the development of the steel-producing cen-ters, which in turn have attracted and concentratedh eavy industry.54W hile lo-cational influences in the steel industry have been changing significantly in the last half-century with the growing impor-tance of scrap and the changing composi-tion of inputs,55n evertheless,t he possible areas for the development of efficient large-scale steel production5 and, there-fore, capital goods industry are severely circumscribed. Amore useful concept of industrialization for our purposes is a region whose export base consists pri-marily of finished consumers' goods and/or finished manufactured producers' goods. We may summarize the argument up to this point as follows: (1) There is no reason why all regions must industrialize in order to continue to grow. (2) A great deal of secondary (and tertiary) industry will develop automatically either because of locational advantages of materials-oriented industry or as a passive reflec-tion of growing income in the region re-sulting from the success of its exportable commodities. (3) The concept of indus-trialization is an ambiguous one that needs further clarification if it is to be useful. Since the growth of a region is tied to the success of its export base, we must examine in more detail the reasons for the growth, decline, and change in the export base. Clearly, the decline of one exportable commodity must be accom-panied by the growth of others, or a re-gion will be left "stranded."57 Among the major reasons58fo r the decline of an ex-isting exportable commodity have been changes in demand outside the region,59 exhaustion of a natural resource,60 in-creasing costs of land or labor relative to those of a competing region,6' and tech-nological changes that changed the rela-tive composition of inputs.62 A histori-cally important reason for the growth of new exports has been major develop-ments in transport (in contrast with mere cost-reducing improvements in trans-port, which may reinforce dependence on existing exports). Such developments have often enabled a region to compete with other regions in the production of goods that were previously economically unfeasible because of the high transfer costs.63 Growth in income and demand in other regions64a nd technological de-velopments65h ave also been important. The role of the state and federal govern-ment in creating social overhead benefits has created new exports in many re-gions,16 and the significance of war in promoting industries that may either continue or leave a residue of capital in-vestment for peacetime use has also been important. A region may expand as a result of in-creased demand for its existing export-able commodities, whether due to an in-crease in the income of the market area or to a change in taste. An improvement in the processing- or transfer-cost posi-tion of the region's staples vis-a-vis com-peting regions will likewise promote growth. Historically, in a young region, the creation of a new export or the expansion of an existing export has resulted in the influx of capital investment both in the export industry and in all the kinds of passive and supporting economic activ-ity described above. Meier has described this process for the Canadian economy in the first decade of the twentieth century, when increased world demand for wheat not only led to an expansion of ware-housing, transport, public utilities, and (constructionin the PrairieP rovinces,b ut also, by increasing income, augmented demand for secondary products and thereby induced investment in a host of other industries.67A s a result the growth of a region will, in all likelihood, be uneven, coming in spurts of increased investment rather than proceeding at an even pace. Increased capital investment in the ex-port industry will go toward achieving optimum size of the enterprise, increased mechanization of the processes, and fur-ther development of the specialized serv-ices to the export. The source of capital will play an important part in the re-gion's growth. Typically, the capital in young regions comes from outside. Prof-its (and some other nonwage income) flow out of the region. To the extent that the export base is profitable, a part of this income will be reinvested in the ex-pansion of this base. With the growth of population and in-come, indigenous savings will increase. Both indigenous savings and the rein-vested capital can pour back into the ex-port industries only up to a point, and then the accumulated capital will tend to overflow into other activity. As described above, some will go into residentiary in-dustry and industries subsidiary to the export; but it is also very likely that some will go into locationally "footloose" in-dustries, which may start out to serve only the region, but which can expand into export industries.
At this point a region is no longer young. The social overhead benefits that have been created through political pres-sure or as a part of the pattern of urban development and the development of a trained labor force and indigenous capi-tal make it far easier to develop new ex-ports. Whether such industries were originally residentiary and, by gradually overcoming transfer-cost disadvantages, became export industries, or were origi-nally footloose industries not significant-ly affected by transfer costs, the result is to broaden the export base. As such a region matures, the staple base will be-come less distinguishable, since its pro-duction will be so varied. We may expect, therefore, that the dif-ferences between regions will become less marked, that secondary industry will tend to be more equalized, and indeed in economic terms that regionalism will tend to disappear. VI The purpose of this paper has been to re-examine location theory and the the-ory of regional economic growth in the light of the historical development of re-gions in America and to advance some propositions that may lead to a new the-ory of regional economic growth. It has been argued that the stages out-lined in the theory of regional economic growth bear little relationship to the character of American development and more specifically do not focus on the cru-cial elements that will enable us to un-derstand that growth. Furthermore, the traditional theory has policy implica-tions that may be fundamentally in er-ror. The first stage of subsistence has been relatively unimportant, and, to the ex-tent that it existed at all, it was because means of transport were lacking rather than because of a nonmarket orientation. In Europe a subsistence or a village econ-omy with local markets was built into the social and economic structure for cen-turies. In America subsistence was only a frontier condition to be overcome as rap-idly as means of transport could be built. The second stage of the theory is based on a gradual widening of the market area with improved transport and the devel-opment of a second stratum to service the basic agricultural stratum. Far from moving through such a gradual progres-sion American regions, as soon as any transport permitted, developed goods for export often to markets thousands of miles away. The early town centers were located not only so as to service the agri-cultural stratum but so as to implement the export of the region's staples. The prosperity of the region depended on its success in competing with other areas producing the same staple exports. Therefore, the region's economic and po-litical efforts were oriented toward the reduction of processing and transfer costs. The struggle for internal improve-ments by the West, the agrarian pressure for inflation and cheaper credit, and the campaign for free coinage of silver were fundamentally economic movements. Their objectives included increasing the supply of capital, eliminating real or fancied transport discrimination, reduc-ing interest rates, and improving the market for silver, however much they may also have been concerned with so-cial justice. The third stage of regional growth has been described as the gradual shift from extensive to intensive farming. While it is true that rising land values promoted such a shift, there were many other rea-sons for a shift in the staple base. New means of transport, changing demand, new technological developments, chang-ing cost relationships vis-1-vis competing regions, government subsidization of so-cial overhead benefits, and war have all been important. The shift from an agricultural to an industrial base has been looked upon as the difficult, but indispensable, step for sustained economic growth. It is a major argument of this paper that such a step may be neither necessary nor desirable and that the evidence customarily ad-vanced to support this argument proves nothing of the sort. There is nothing to prevent population and per capita in-come from growing in a region whose ex-port base is agricultural. Moreover, there is nothing difficult about developing sec-ondary and tertiary industry in such a region. Indeed, it will develop automati-cally, often to such an extent that analy-sis of the region in terms of distribution of employment will lead to the conclusion that it is an industrial region. The final stage has typically been con-ceived to be the mature regional econ-omy exporting capital, skills, and spe-cialized services to less-well-developed regions. While this may be true for some regions, it is unlikely to be a final stage for all. Indeed, one would presume that some sort of balanced relationship would emerge among regions as transfer costs become less significant and income dif-ferentials tend to be ironed out by long-run factor mobility. The major propositions that emerge from this paper are: 1. For economists' purposes the con-cept of a region should be redefined to point out that the unifying cohesion to a region, over and beyond geographic simi-larities, is its development around a com-mon export base. It is this that makes it economically unified and ties the for-tunes of the area together. This tends to result in the interdependent development within the region of external economies and unified political efforts for govern-ment assistance or political reform. The geographer has emphasized the distribu-tive functions of the nodal centers of a region, but the role of the nodal center in providing external economies for the ex-port industries has been equally impor-tant. 2. The success of the export base has been the determining factor in the rate of growth of regions. Therefore, in order to understand this growth, we must ex-amine the locational factors that have enabled the staples to develop. 3. The importance of the export base is a result of its primary role in determin-ing the level of absolute and per capita income in a region, and therefore in de-termining the amount of residentiary secondary and tertiary activity that will develop. The export base has also sig-nificantly influenced the character of subsidiary industry, the distribution of population and pattern of urbanization, the character of the labor force, the so-cial and political attitudes of the region, and its sensitivity to fluctuations of in-come and employment. 4. In a young region dependence on staples is reinforced by the concerted ef-forts of the region's residents to reduce processing and transfer costs through technological research, and state and federal government subsidization of so-cial overhead benefits, as well as the tendency for outside suppliers of capital to reinvest in the existing staple base. 5. Some regions, because of locational advantages, have developed an export base of manufactured products, but this is not a necessary stage for the sustained growth of all regions. A great deal of sec-ondary and tertiary industry will result from the success of the export base. This residentiary industry will, in all likeli-hood, provide for widening the export base as a region develops. 6. The growth of regions has tended to be uneven. A given increase in demand for the region's exports (or a significant reduction in processing or transfer costs) has resulted in a multiple effect on the region, inducing increased investment not only in the export industry but in all other kinds of economic activity as well. 7. As a region's income grows, in-digenous savings will tend to spill over into new kinds of activities. At first, these activities satisfy local demand, but ulti-mately some of them will become export industries. This movement is reinforced by the tendency for transfer costs to be-come less significant. As a result, the ex-port bases of regions tend to become more diversified, and they tend to lose their identity as regions. Ultimately, we may expect with long-run factor mobility more equalization of per capita income and a wider dispersion of production.
